Update getting_started.md (#101)
cheng-tan/vowpalwabbit.github.io: _guides/getting_started.md

resource_icon: /svg/resources/guide.svg
---

# Getting Started with Linear Regression and Vowpal Wabbit

> This guide describes how to run Linear Regression with Vowpal Wabbit (VW). It features an overview of a simple regression problem using a VW workflow tutorial with examples. Find information about interacting with VW, including structuring input, understanding output, and learn important VW diagnostics. 

Author: @kumpera comments: 
Linear Regression is a form of regression, not an algorithm per-se.
Creation of models is one of the many tasks the reader can do, it's not an end goal on itself.
I think "in VW" sounds worse than "with VW" as the result of such regression outlives the usage VW itself.

See updated. Will apply to CB guide as well.

## Getting started with Vowpal Wabbit

> To install VW—and for more information on building VW from source or using a package manager—see [Getting started](https://github.com/VowpalWabbit/vowpal_wabbit/wiki/Getting-started) guide. 

Reviewer: We need to fix the links to point to the right place. @cheng-tan  could you help Mike use the proper relative link syntax here?

Reviewer 2: this links needs adding some code. On line 13, adding in 
`{% assign getting_started = site.guides | where: "module_id","getting_started" | first %}`

Then on line 19 replace the URL to `({{ site.baseurl }}{{getting_started.url}})`

> >**Note:** The CB tutorial uses [Vowpal Wabbit Python package](https://github.com/VowpalWabbit/vowpal_wabbit/tree/master/python). Additional binary packages are available for select platforms. See [Getting started](https://cheng-tan.github.io/vowpalwabbit.github.io/) module on the homepage for more information.

Author: @kumpera comments: 
supposed is ambiguous as it might mean that it's available from X but not supported.
Support is a loaded technical term that is usually better replaced.
We want to mention Python, we want to highlight Python.

Rewrite to accomodate, will include in CB guide note as well.

Reviewer: The Python link is wrong, people should use the install instructions to get to it.
I'm confused why we have a note about the CB tutorial here.

> >**Note:** This tutorial uses [Vowpal Wabbit Python package](https://github.com/VowpalWabbit/vowpal_wabbit/tree/master/python). Additional binary packages are available for select platforms. See [Getting started](https://cheng-tan.github.io/vowpalwabbit.github.io/) module on the homepage for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Note:** This tutorial uses [Vowpal Wabbit Python package](https://github.com/VowpalWabbit/vowpal_wabbit/tree/master/python). Additional binary packages are available for select platforms. See [Getting started]({{ site.baseurl }}/#get_started) module on the homepage for more information.
```

```
0 | price:.23 sqft:.25 age:.05 2006
```

-The first number in each line is a label. 
-A `0` label corresponds to no roof-replacement, while a `1` label corresponds to a roof-replacement. 
-The bar `|` separates label related data (what we want to predict) from features (what we always know). 
-The features in the first line are `price`, `sqft`, `age`, and `2006`. Each feature may have an optional `:<numeric_value>` following it or, if the value is missing, an implied value of `1`. 

The label information for the second line is more complex than the first: 

`1 2 'second_house | price:.18 sqft:.15 age:.35 1976`

- The `1` is the label indicating that a roof replacement is required. 
- The `2` is an optional _importance weight_, which implies that this example counts twice. The importance weight comes up in many settings. 

> - A missing importance weight defaults to 1. `'second_house` is the tag. You can find more information on importance weight in the the Vowpal Wabbit diagnostic header section below.

Author: @kumpera comments:
I just realized that the wording of it is used elsewhere to identify the example is quite vague. It does show up later in this tutorial so shouldn't we setup the right expectation?

Does this work Rodrigo? 

@cheng-tan can we add an anchor link to section specified?

Reviewer: I was refering to the tag `second_house`. It's used later in the prediction output part.

using no cache
Reading datafile = house_dataset
num sources = 1

> average since  example example current current current

Reviewer: We should keep the vertical spacing. The columns otherwise don't show aligned.

Author: Done

best constant's loss = 0.250000
total feature number = 15
```

## Vowpal Wabbit diagnostics

This section provides information on the various types of diagnostic information VW presents.

**Use** `--quiet`  command to turn off diagnostic information in Vowpal Wabbit.

### Hash function bits

> The following VW output shows the number of bits from the hash function:

Author: @ kumpera comment:
This is not a code sample, it's from the VW output

I updated all of these references, copy/paste error...

```
Num weight bits = 18
```

> This diagnostic shows that the number of bits from the hash function is 18 (more than enough for this example). Use `-b bits` to adjust the number of bits for a hash function.

Author: @kumpera comments:
We use the bits that comes out of the hash function.

Changed

> This diagnostic shows that the number of bits from the hash function is 18 (more than enough for this example). Use `-b bits` to adjust the number of bits for a hash function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This diagnostic shows that the number of bits used from the hash function is 18 (more than enough for this example). Use `-b bits` to adjust the number of bits to use.
```

Btw, should we explain what we use those bits for and why?

Author: Yes, in an equal amount of space if possible? 

Probably doesn't warrant it's own section if that's what it would take.

### Learning rate

The following VW output shows the learning rate:

```
learning rate = 0.5
```

The default learning rate is `0.5` with current default update (`--normalized --invariant --adaptive`). 

> If the data is noisy, you need a larger data-set or multiple passes to predict well. For massive data-sets, the learning rate decays to `0` by default. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the data is noisy, you need a larger data-set or multiple passes to predict well. For massive data-sets, the learning rate decays towards `0` by default. 
```

Learning rate doesn't get to zero, but almost.

**Use** `-l rate` to adjust the learning rate up or down.

.**Note:** A high learning rate makes the model converge faster than a low learning rate, but if you adjust the learning rate too high, you risk over-fit and end-up worse on average.

### Learning rate decay

The following VW output sample shows the initial time:

```
initial_t = 0
```

> This diagnostic shows the initial time duration for learning rate decay. 

Author: @kumpera comments:
Diagnostic output only shows what was used.

Please confirm this is accurate, changed to "shows", deleted "or"

> This diagnostic shows the initial time duration for learning rate decay. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This diagnostic shows the initial time for learning rate decay. 
```

**Use** `--initial_t time` to adjust the initial time. 

> >**Note:** It is common to need to adjust the initial time in Vowpal Wabbit. 

Author: @kumpera comments:
We're talking about options that the user might need to use with VW to achieve their goal.
Saying that it's not common doesn't tell anything about why.

Please confirm accuracy of statement now, "it IS common TO NEED to adjust `--initial_t time`...

Reviewer: This statement is in contradiction with the original. Setting is rarely needed.

> >**Note:** It is common to need to adjust the initial time in Vowpal Wabbit. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note:** Changing this value is rarely needed with VW. 
```

Author: Changing to active voice: "It is rare to change this value in VW. 

Do you think it warrants a "why" here? Or explain an option where it is necessary to change the initial time?

> ### Learning rate decay power

Reviewer: This is not about the power of the learning rate decay. This is about the mathematical power operator applied to the learning rate decay. It's power as in the phrase "3 to the power of 2 is equal to 9"

Author: So change section H3 title to "Power Operator?" We need an accurate H3 here for consistency and flow.

The following VW output shows the power of learning rate decay:

```
power_t = 0.5
```

> This diagnostic shows the power on learning rate decay. The VW default is `0.5` and works well for most problems. 

Author: @kumpera comments:
The change from "on" to "of" changes the meaning of the expression. It power in the mathematical sense and not metaphorical one.
The diagnostic output only shows what was used.

Gotcha

Reviewer: This needs to be changed in all previous parts that refers to power_t as well.

> The `0.5` default is a minimax optimal choice for stationary data-sets where the fundamental relation between the input features and target label do not change over time and benefit from a high (close to 1.0) `--power_t` while learning against changing conditions. 

Reviewer: 0.5 has nothing to do with stationary data-sets.

Move `0.5 is the default and a minimax optimal choice.` to the list of interesting values.

`A different way of stating this is: stationary data-sets where the fundamental relation between the input features and target label are not changing over time, should benefit from a high (close to 1.0) `--power_t` while learning against changing conditions, like learning against an adversary who continuously changes the rules-of-the-game, would benefit from low (close to 0) `--power_t` so the learner can react quickly to these changing conditions.` is an explanation of how to pick the value.

Author: See updated

Conditions like learning against an adversary who continuously changes the rules-of-the-game, benefit from low (close to 0) `--power_t` so the learner can react quickly to these changing conditions. 

**Use** `--power_t p` to adjust learning rate decay—where _p_ is in the range [0,1]. 

`0` means the learning rate does not decay, which can be helpful when state tracking.
`1` is aggressive, but plausible if a data-set represents a collection of random variables is [independent and identically distributed (IID)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Independent_and_identically_distributed_random_variables).

### Cache files

The following VW output shows that you are not using a cache file: 

```
using no cache
```

> A cache file speeds up training when you run many experiments (with different options) on the same data-set—even if each experiment is only a single pass. 

Reviewer: This wording is bad. It draws conclusions from the examples of where caching is helpful.
Something long this lines would be better.
```
A cache file contains your data-set in a faster to handle format.

A cache file can greatly speed up training if you're either using multiple passes or running multiple experiments on the same data-set (even with different options).
```

Author: Updated

The default cache file name is the data-set file name with `.cache` appended. For example, `house_dataset.cache`. 

**Use** `--cache_file housing.cache` to override the default cache file name. 

The first time you use `-c` you create a cache file. If the cache already exists and it is newer than the data-set, that is the default cache.  

> **Use** `-c` for multiple passes `--passes`, so VW caches the data in a faster format (passes > 1 should be much faster).  

Reviewer: This breakdown of use/note is confusing. This is a recommendation for both cases.

Author: See updated

>**Note:** If you want to experiment with the same data-set over and over, it is highly recommended to pass `-c` every time you train.

### Data sources 

The following VW output shows the source of data: 

```
Reading datafile = house_dataset
```

> VW supports a variety of different input methods. This example uses a simple text file, and VW displays a diagnostic with the source of the data. 

Reviewer: `Display a diagnostic` rubs me really wrong. VW displays text and some of it are diagnostics.

Author: Deleted

Alternative data sources include _cache files_ (from previous VW runs), _stdin_, or a _tcp socket_.

### Number of data sources

The following VW output shows the number of data sources:

```
num sources = 1
```

> There is only one input file in this example. You can specify multiple files in VW.

Reviewer: This tutorial is only about VW, why keep repeating that's about VW all the time?

Author: Good point

## Vowpal Wabbit diagnostic header

Next, VW shows you some diagnostic information in the header.

```
average since  example example current current current
loss  last  counter weight label predict features

> 0.000000 0.000000      1 1.0 0.0000 0.0000    5

Reviewer: Revert this change. The vertical alignment is intentional and without it you can't tell what value is associated with which column.

Author: Done

0.666667 1.000000      2 3.0 1.0000 0.0000    5
```

-**`average loss`** computes the <a href="http://hunch.net/~jl/projects/prediction_bounds/progressive_validation/coltfinal.pdf" target="_blank">progressive validation</a> loss. Progressive validation loss deviates like a test set, and hence is a reliable indicator of success on the first pass over any data-set.
-**`since last`** is the progressive validation loss since the last printout.
-**`example counter`** indicates which example is printed out. In this case,  example `2`.

> -**`example weight`** is the sum of the importance weights of examples so far. In this case, it's `3.0`, because the second example has an importance weight of `2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-**`example weight`** is the sum of the importance weights of examples seen so far. In this case, it's `3.0`, because the second example has an importance weight of `2`.
```

I can't say what does"examples so far" suggests without "seen"

-**`current label`** is the label of the second example.
-**`current predict`** is the prediction (before training) on the current example.
-**`current features`** is the number of features in the current example. 

The `current features` diagnostic is excellent for debugging. Note that we have five features when you expect four. This change happens because VW always adds a default _constant feature_.

> **Use** `--noconstant` the default constant feature off in VW. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Use** `--noconstant` to disable the default constant feature. 
```

## Vowpal Wabbit debugging diagnostics 

> Now, VW prints a new line with an exponential backoff. This information is useful for debugging problems before the learning algorithm finishes with a data-set:

Reviewer: This paragraph has no connection with the next line. Revert this edit.

Author: We need something before the output example under the H2. Please add some copy to introduce or transition to the output example.

best constant's loss = 0.250000
total feature number = 15
```

The `best constant` and `best constant's loss` only work if you are using squared loss. Squared loss is the default for VW. They compute the best constant's predictor and the loss of the best constant predictor. 

If `average loss` is not better than `best constant's loss`, something is wrong. In this case, we have too few examples to generalize.

If you want to overfit, use the following:

```sh
vw house_dataset -l 10 -c --passes 25 --holdout_off
```

Now, the progress section of the output looks like this:

```
average since  example example current current current
loss  last  counter weight label predict features
0.000000 0.000000      1 1.0 0.0000 0.0000    5
0.666667 1.000000      2 3.0 1.0000 0.0000    5
0.589385 0.531424      5 7.0 1.0000 0.2508    5
0.378923 0.194769     11 15.0 1.0000 0.8308    5
0.184476 0.002182     23 31.0 1.0000 0.9975    5

> 0.090774 0.000000     47 63.0 1.0000 1.0000    5

Reviewer: Don't change formating of output blocks. It makes them unreadable.

Author: This, and the others, was a formatting error when we copy/pasted from my backup file after losing commits.

```

> Notice that the `since last` data dropped to `0` on line six, `example 47` (25 passes over 3 examples result in 75 examples). This result implies that, by looking at the same 3 lines of data 25 times, we reached a _perfect predictor_. Not surprising, given that with three examples and five features for each example. 

Reviewer: `Notice that the `since last` data dropped to `0` on line six, `example 47` (25 passes over 3 examples result in 75 examples)` Makes no sense.

Author: "line six" referenced the table data, I dropped that. The rest is an effort to hold the reader's hand when you ref table data and call attention to previous examples/output.

> >**Note:** You have to add `--holdout_off` when running multiple-passes. VW automatically switches to _over-fit avoidance_ mode by holding 10% of the examples and evaluating performance on the data being held instead of using online training progressive loss algorithms.

Reviewer: This is wrong. Only the example needed --holdoud_off and not when using multiple passes.

> **Use** `--holdout_period period` to change the one in 10 default holdout in VW. 

Reviewer: the "1 in 10" period.

> ## Saving regressor model files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Saving your model into a file
```

Vowpal Wabbit learns the weights of the features and keeps them in an _in-memory vector_ by default. 

> **Add** `-f filename` to create and save the final regressor file. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Add** `-f filename` to save the final regressor weights to a file. For example:
```

```sh
vw house_dataset -l 10 -c --passes 25 --holdout_off -f house.model
```

## Make predictions with Vowpal Wabbit 

> You can make predictions in VW by supplying the `-p filename`. For example, using filename `stdout`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can make predictions in VW by supplying the `-p filename`. For example, to output them to standard out
```

```sh
vw house_dataset -p /dev/stdout --quiet
```

The output for this command is:

```
0.000000
0.000000 second_house
1.000000 third_house
```

The first line, `0.000000` refers to the first example, which has an empty tag.
The second line, `0.000000 second_house` refers to the second example. Notice that the tag appears here. The primary use of the tag is mapping predictions to the corresponding examples.
The third output, `1.000000 third_house` refers to the third example. The initial prediction was set to `0.5`, and the prediction is now `1.000000`. This result means that _some_ learning occurred. 

> In the last example, the model was built in memory incrementally, as VW analyzed the examples. In other words, you predicted _while you learned_.

Reviewer: analyzed has no meaning here.

Author: Is there a better, more accurate term to replace "went over?"

> In the last example, the model was built in memory incrementally, as VW analyzed the examples. In other words, you predicted _while you learned_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last example, VW predicted while it learned. The model was being built in memory incrementally, as VW went over the examples.
```

> It is more common to learn first, then save the model file. Then, you make predictions using that saved model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is more common to learn first, then save the model to a file. Then, you make predictions using that saved model.
```

**Use:** `-i house.model` to load the initial model to memory. 

**Add** `-t` to specify _test-only_ (do no learning). For example:

```sh
vw -i house.model -t house_dataset -p /dev/stdout --quiet
```

The output for this command is:

```
0.000000
1.000000 second_house
0.000000 third_house
```

> The results are different for this example because the first prediction example made only one pass over the data, in other words, learning as it worked. 

Reviewer: This words is confusing and wrong.

The example reference is for the invocation of vw right before this one.

For this example, you loaded the over-fitted model (25 passes) and used the `house_dataset` with `-t` (or _testing only_ mode). 

>**Note:** Always use a different data-set for testing vs. training for real prediction settings.

> ## Auditing machine learning applications with Vowpal Wabbit

Reviewer: No, we're not auditing applications.

VW has a built-in audit option that helps debug machine learning (ML) applications.

**Use** `--audit` to output helpful information about predictions and features. For example: 

```sh
vw house_dataset --audit --quiet
```

The output for this command is:

```
0
  price:229902:0.23:0@0 sqft:162853:0.25:0@0 age:165201:0.05:0@0 2006:2006:1:0@0 Constant:116060:1:0@0
0 second_house
  price:229902:0.18:0@0 sqft:162853:0.15:0@0 age:165201:0.35:0@0 1976:1976:1:0@0 Constant:116060:1:0@0
1 third_house
  price:229902:0.53:0.882655@0.2592 age:165201:0.87:0.453833@0.98 sqft:162853:0.32:1.05905@0.18 Constant:116060:1:0.15882@8 1924:1924:1:0@0
```

Every example uses two lines:

The first line is the prediction.
The second line shows one entry per feature. 

> VW has an advanced_namespaces_ feature that allows you to group features and operate them on-the-fly. Namespace options include the following: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VW has an advanced _namespaces_ feature that allows you to group features and operate them on-the-fly. Namespace options include the following: 
```

Use `-q XY` to cross a pair of namespaces.
Use `--cubic XYZ` to cross 3 namespaces.
Use `--lrq XYn` to low-rank quadratic interactions.
Use `--ignore X` to skip all features belonging to a namespace.

The first feature listed is:

```
price:229902:0.23:0@0.25
```

For the first feature listed, **`price`** is the original feature name. If you use a namespace, it appears before `^`. For example: 

> `Namespace^Feature` 

Reviewer: This looks really confusing as it breaks the bullet point description of the line

Author: Yes, it does, updated and rearranged. Please check for accuracy.

- ** `229902`** is the index of the feature, computed by a hash function on the feature name.
- **`0.23`** is the value of the feature.
- **`0`** is the value of the feature's weight.
- **`@0.25**` is the sum of gradients squared for that feature (when you use _per-feature adaptive learning rates_).

> Notice that the feature `2006` uses the index 2006. Like other ML tools, you can use _hashes_ or _pre-computed indices_ for features in VW.

Reviewer: This changes the meaning of the phrase. Only pre-computed indices are common. hashes are not

Author: Got it, reverted to emphasize indices is common, hashes more unique.
